[Unknown]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other day.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed that I was 700 years old.
[Amit Varma]: I was in a courtroom fighting a case that had been going on for the last 680 years.
[Amit Varma]: I begged the judge for a judgment.
[Amit Varma]: I've been waiting so long, I told him.
[Amit Varma]: It's been more than 600 years. Please put me out of my misery.
[Amit Varma]: Deliver a judgment.
[Amit Varma]: The judge looked at me and said,
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I can deliver a judgment, but then this case will go to appeals and that will take another 700 years.
[Amit Varma]: What's your life span anyway, Mr. Verma?
[Amit Varma]: How long do you want to live?
[Amit Varma]: Forever, I said. I will wait forever.
[Amit Varma]: What choice do I have?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: None of us need to be told that our country's judicial system is in a mess.
[Amit Varma]: Cases drag on for years and decades,
[Amit Varma]: and I've actually heard of a case which is more than a few hundred years old.
[Amit Varma]: Don't ask me how that happened.
[Amit Varma]: So the subject for this episode, therefore, is judicial reforms.
[Amit Varma]: And to help me make sense of all the ways in which our judicial system is messed up
[Amit Varma]: and all that we can do about it,
[Amit Varma]: I have with me as my guest, my friend Alok Prasanna Kumar,
[Amit Varma]: who is a senior fellow and heads a Bangalore office of the Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy.
[Amit Varma]: We had this conversation a couple of weeks ago in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: Alok, thanks so much for coming on The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Alok, all of us know that the judiciary is in need of reform.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to come at this episode from a complete layman's point of view.
[Amit Varma]: What we typically know about the judiciary is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you get those Bollywood dialogues of Tariq pe Tariq, Tariq pe Tariq.
[Amit Varma]: We know it's overburdened.
[Amit Varma]: We know that under trials stay in prison for decades sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: And we know that cases just linger for literally hundreds of years.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, someone was telling me the oldest case is some 700 years old
[Amit Varma]: and it's just continuing through all these ages.
[Amit Varma]: What I want you to do today in the course of this conversation is,
[Amit Varma]: number one, actually define what is the scope of the problem?
[Unknown]: What caused it?
[Amit Varma]: What can we do about it?
[Amit Varma]: And how hard is it to carry out those reforms?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, defining the scope of the problem.
[Guest]: When we say the judiciary, there is no one wing of the judiciary
[Guest]: which is not free of this problem.
[Guest]: We have the same kinds of problems happening at all levels.
[Guest]: And there are multiple problems.
[Guest]: I think some are problems with the institution itself as it stands.
[Guest]: We have not really moved away from the 19th century notion
[Guest]: of what a judiciary should be.
[Guest]: We have added computers and possibly used nice fonts in our pleadings.
[Guest]: But our notion of how the judiciary should function
[Guest]: still harks back to the 19th century House of Lords.
[Guest]: And the structure of the judiciary follows
[Guest]: is almost similar to what the British had set up.
[Guest]: The only difference being that the subordinate judiciary
[Guest]: is not under the control of the state government.
[Guest]: So what is that 19th century notion?
[Guest]: The 19th century notion is that you have people
[Guest]: who want to file voluminous pleadings,
[Guest]: who are happy to engage in litigation as long as they want.
[Guest]: And the court's job is not to tell them to move on quickly,
[Guest]: but let parties take their own time
[Guest]: and you figure out how to decide the cases.
[Guest]: Judgments are delivered, of course, in accordance with the law, obviously,
[Guest]: but this is what the institution should work like.
[Guest]: It still follows the approach that people will decide
[Guest]: how they want to litigate a case.
[Guest]: Their job is only to, as with a baseball umpire,
[Guest]: call the pitches and call the strikers.
[Guest]: And there's a reason why I'm using baseball
[Guest]: because in baseball, the umpire's role is relatively much smaller
[Guest]: than the role of an umpire in cricket.
[Guest]: In cricket, there are subjective calls that the umpire makes.
[Guest]: Umpire speeds up the game.
[Guest]: Umpire can say, okay, you're taking too much time.
[Guest]: Move quickly, move quickly or I'll penalize you in this way.
[Guest]: So ironically, even though we got cricket from the Brits,
[Guest]: we haven't adopted that approach in our judiciary at all.
[Guest]: So we are still content at letting the judge be somebody who says,
[Guest]: fine, you want to file one more document, take some more time.
[Guest]: Fine, you want an adjournment, take your time.
[Amit Varma]: Do this, that.
[Amit Varma]: That's the basic level of support.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think the 19th century notion, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is that the judge is only interested in the final outcome
[Guest]: and doesn't interfere much with the smoothening of the process?
[Guest]: No, it isn't.
[Guest]: And the idea is that the process is something
[Guest]: which broadly meets the requirements of the natural justice,
[Guest]: but we have to hold them to the process.
[Guest]: If somebody needs time to file this document,
[Guest]: the other person has to be given time to respond to this.
[Guest]: Then the other person has to be able to allow to do this.
[Guest]: Our code of civil procedure was drafted
[Guest]: in the first decade of the 20th century.
[Guest]: We have made no major amendments to it.
[Guest]: The one effort at trying to make an amendment
[Guest]: was rolled back almost instantly.
[Guest]: So we are still stuck with this old notions
[Guest]: of how a case should move through the court,
[Guest]: whereas the rest of the world has moved on.
[Guest]: Even Britain has moved on.
[Guest]: Even they have understood that cases have to follow
[Guest]: a certain approach in terms of
[Guest]: they need to be done by this period of time, right?
[Guest]: And it's in the hands of the judge
[Guest]: to ensure that it's done in this period of time.
[Guest]: The judge is a person now responsible for seeing a case through,
[Guest]: not up to the parties.
[Guest]: So the judge will say, look, I'm giving you this much time.
[Guest]: You have to do whatever you need to do in this time.
[Guest]: I'll fix it for arguments.
[Guest]: And I want you to finish your arguments by this period of time.
[Guest]: And I'm delivering judgment.
[Guest]: All these countries have realized that
[Guest]: there is a certain point of time where you just can't keep adding
[Guest]: capacity to the judiciary and hoping that everything will continue as normal.
[Guest]: They've all recognized that it works.
[Guest]: The judiciary as understood in the 19th century model judiciary
[Guest]: is extremely inefficient.
[Guest]: It's extremely inefficient.
[Guest]: It is not geared towards quick disposal of cases.
[Guest]: Yes, parties will be convinced of the court's independence,
[Guest]: but the fact is there's only a certain price
[Guest]: that are willing to pay to wait for the judgment to come eventually.
[Amit Varma]: So as an old cliche goes,
[Amit Varma]: justice delayed and justice denied and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So what you'd say is that the 21st century mode of justice
[Amit Varma]: pays a lot of importance to the process so that justice is not delayed.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And is this sort of a necessity brought about
[Amit Varma]: by the sheer volume of cases and litigants
[Amit Varma]: that of course happens with the growing population
[Amit Varma]: or would you say that it is part of the better delivery of justice as well?
[Guest]: It's, it's also, it's, it's a bit of both.
[Guest]: Now, in terms of actual number of cases,
[Guest]: India probably doesn't have as many as the US.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to compare one to one,
[Guest]: but the volume of litigation probably is less in India than in the US as well.
[Guest]: Because the other factor for growth of population is economic growth.
[Guest]: So which means you have more entities,
[Guest]: you have companies filing trusts, filing societies,
[Guest]: filing cases against each other and so on.
[Guest]: But also the fact that we have not seen the justice delivery as a service.
[Guest]: We've just seen us as this big institution sitting in the old sandstone
[Guest]: that is immovable and whatever.
[Guest]: And we've never thought of what goes on inside that institution.
[Guest]: How are cases taken on board, listed, heard, disposed of?
[Guest]: We've never really thought about it seriously.
[Guest]: And only now that people are realizing, oh, hang on, you know,
[Guest]: we should start looking into the processes of the judiciary
[Guest]: and realizing that, oh, well, there's no way, you know,
[Guest]: if this was a process in any private company,
[Guest]: it would have collapsed in a matter of months because nothing happens.
[Guest]: So, which is why I think we have not seen it in those terms.
[Guest]: And the pity is it, this whole argument of first world judiciary
[Guest]: and so on and stuff doesn't really hold
[Guest]: because you have an excellent model just across the Andaman Sea.
[Guest]: Singapore, for instance, is truly the beneficiary of India's failing judicial system.
[Guest]: Some of the highest value arbitration,
[Guest]: some of the most important commercial cases go to Singapore.
[Guest]: Greatest example, Ranbaxy.
[Guest]: Ranbaxy and Daichi sank your case, went to Singapore Arbitral Tribunal.
[Guest]: Why? Because the parties are sure that in Singapore,
[Guest]: when you arbitrate a case, it's done within a year.
[Guest]: When you challenge it in court, it's done within a fixed period of time.
[Guest]: And when you challenge it even further, that also has a fixed period of time.
[Amit Varma]: So, therefore, both parties recognize that closure is important, has value,
[Amit Varma]: and that delays are a negative sum game.
[Amit Varma]: Both parties heard, so let's just go to Singapore, get it sorted out quickly.
[Amit Varma]: Whoever loses, loses.
[Amit Varma]: So, my question is that this 19th century mode of thinking, as you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: is it embedded in the laws and the rules for the institution to follow
[Amit Varma]: or is it part of convention and it's just evolved this way?
[Guest]: So, interestingly, to go back a little bit into history,
[Guest]: India got its laws codified much before Britain did.
[Guest]: Even though we were being ruled by the British same people,
[Guest]: they figured, no, no, no, these people can't be trusted to evolve
[Guest]: our conventions or understand our traditions.
[Guest]: We'll codify everything.
[Guest]: The problem is that since then, we haven't moved on.
[Guest]: We are still stuck.
[Guest]: So, and this is something that I'd like to tell everybody and shocks people.
[Guest]: Our Code of Criminal Procedure provides you better civil rights guarantees
[Guest]: than the Constitution of India.
[Guest]: If, if, if a judge just followed the Code of Criminal Procedure, right,
[Guest]: you would ensure that you are heard properly.
[Guest]: You would ensure that you are not detained for longer than necessary.
[Guest]: You would ensure that you get a lawyer.
[Guest]: You would have the right to cross exemption.
[Guest]: All of this is guaranteed in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
[Guest]: not our Constitution.
[Guest]: Nobody thought that, guys, this is a, you know, a colonial thing.
[Guest]: Maybe we need to either a change our Code of Criminal Procedure,
[Guest]: that keeping all those civil rights requirements,
[Guest]: but ensuring that a trial happens quickly or, you know,
[Guest]: we put it into the Constitution to ensure that everything,
[Guest]: other changes can be made more organically as things go on.
[Guest]: So we are now left with a situation where, unfortunately,
[Guest]: all state governments seem to think that the way to ensure quick justice
[Guest]: is to loosen the requirements of the Criminal Justice,
[Guest]: Criminal Procedure Code, which means you won't get bail,
[Guest]: you won't be heard, summary trial.
[Guest]: I mean, all this kind of stuff is a basic violation of civil rights
[Guest]: and none of this actually helps in moving a case forward.
[Guest]: All it does.
[Guest]: So you will find special courts have failed across the country.
[Guest]: Why? Because they will not give proper hearings.
[Guest]: They will pass rush judgments.
[Guest]: And the moment a judge in an appeals court sees it,
[Guest]: they'll say, this is rubbish.
[Guest]: How can I, how can you possibly convict on so little evidence?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a historical sense of this.
[Amit Varma]: So when you talk about special courts, what are these special courts?
[Amit Varma]: What were they set up for? And so on.
[Guest]: So initially the idea for special courts comes in the fifties.
[Guest]: And the fact that, you know, you feel like, okay,
[Guest]: there are certain crimes in the context of partitions, basically.
[Guest]: And, uh, you know, uh, communist, uh, uprisings and so on.
[Guest]: You want special courts to try certain categories of offenses.
[Guest]: Now, uh, unfortunately the Supreme Court sort of made a mistake by saying,
[Guest]: okay, find an exceptional situation.
[Guest]: But that exception has widened over the years, right?
[Guest]: In the very, one of the very first cases regarding article 14,
[Guest]: the Supreme Court said in certain exceptional cases,
[Guest]: we'll allow the special courts and so on.
[Guest]: But the, nowadays a special court has lost all meaning.
[Guest]: It's your regular court, your regular court that sits in, say, the city.
[Amit Varma]: But does it have like speed in the procedures or something?
[Guest]: They mess it up, mess around a little bit with it.
[Guest]: They don't speed it up as much, so much as to say, okay,
[Guest]: you lose your right to this.
[Guest]: You lose your right to cross-examine or you lose your right to apply for bail
[Guest]: or you'll have to do it in three months and so on.
[Guest]: Or what they do, which is even worse,
[Guest]: is to say these categories of offenses will go before the special courts
[Guest]: that the regular procedure is followed and you'll realize it moves quickly.
[Guest]: But then that means every other category of cases stuck.
[Guest]: So in that way, what causes the problem is that
[Guest]: you're not really resolving the system's issues.
[Guest]: You are addressing one particular part of it,
[Guest]: but causing 10 other problems, you know,
[Guest]: like literally you're trying to solve the seen problem
[Guest]: and causing 10 other unseen problems.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen problems, which is a question of capacity,
[Amit Varma]: but we'll get to that later.
[Amit Varma]: So would you say that some of the civil rights protections
[Amit Varma]: that the criminal code offered, which the constitution doesn't,
[Amit Varma]: are now slowly being taken away by states
[Amit Varma]: and the constitution doesn't protect them anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So here we are in trouble.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And it's the constitution's job really to have embodied those in the wrong.
[Guest]: To an extent, yes, because there's a little bit of complacency.
[Guest]: If you see the constitution, constituent assembly debates,
[Guest]: you know, somebody says, you know,
[Guest]: you should, you should put the right to cross examine in the constitution itself.
[Guest]: You should put these three, four other things.
[Guest]: Ambedkar sort of dismisses it saying, no, no,
[Guest]: only a very insane state government will say,
[Guest]: we'll take away the right to cross examination.
[Guest]: But consider things like the Gunda's Act, right?
[Guest]: See what procedures they have. There's none.
[Guest]: There's literally none.
[Guest]: Explain that to me. What is the Gunda's Act?
[Guest]: So for instance,
[Guest]: the Gunda's Act is to sort of catch hold of people who are quote unquote history
[Guest]: cheaters, those who repeat offenses.
[Guest]: It allows the detention, prevent the detention of people.
[Guest]: And there are very little criminal,
[Guest]: like it's one of those where the focus is on,
[Guest]: let's try and get a conviction somehow or the other.
[Guest]: The other egregious thing is the NDPS Act,
[Guest]: Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
[Guest]: which sort of makes it difficult for you to get bail.
[Guest]: There are a whole range of laws that make it difficult for you to get bail.
[Guest]: Uttar Pradesh has done away with anticipatory bail, right?
[Guest]: In terms of the fact that you're making it as hard as possible
[Guest]: for somebody to get out of jail, you know,
[Guest]: even if they have not actually committed the crime or
[Guest]: when the Supreme Court has repeatedly tried to say that
[Guest]: bail should be the rule and jail the exception.
[Guest]: Now they're trying to change our laws to make it the other way around.
[Guest]: And you have other egregious laws like,
[Guest]: you know, apart from national security,
[Guest]: you also have the Makoka and the UP,
[Guest]: other versions of the Makoka perusing up around the country,
[Guest]: all of which sort of say that confessions obtained
[Guest]: by a police officer are admissible in court,
[Guest]: you know, which is basically like an incentive to torture,
[Guest]: saying stuff like, you know,
[Guest]: even if we'll loosen the rules of evidence
[Guest]: so that we don't impose a rigorous standard
[Guest]: to prove that you actually collected this from this person.
[Guest]: So there are a whole range of such sort of
[Guest]: civil rights weakening happening at the state level
[Guest]: where they're responding to, oh no, why aren't criminals getting convicted?
[Guest]: The problem is the procedure, not the institution.
[Guest]: So therefore the civil rights are being weakened as a result.
[Amit Varma]: So when state governments weaken these civil rights
[Amit Varma]: in these various different ways,
[Amit Varma]: what are the sort of incentives that are playing on them?
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, do they want cases to get over quickly?
[Amit Varma]: Do they want to strengthen their own hands
[Amit Varma]: so they can do what they want?
[Amit Varma]: What are the incentives playing out here?
[Guest]: Primarily it is to respond to this public outcry, right?
[Guest]: So for instance,
[Amit Varma]: So it's optics, that hey, we are doing something,
[Amit Varma]: strong arm of the law.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, A is optics.
[Guest]: We'll introduce the Gundas Act,
[Guest]: we'll use the NSA,
[Guest]: we'll use the amendments to the IPC and whatever.
[Guest]: That's the optics.
[Guest]: The second is,
[Guest]: so when the clamour dies down,
[Guest]: they're still left with the power.
[Guest]: So they'll use it as they see fit.
[Guest]: So they'll use the NSA to jail Chandrasekhar Ravan in Uttar Pradesh
[Guest]: because he is organizing Dalits.
[Guest]: Or you will use sedition against Hardik Patel in Gujarat
[Guest]: because he's threatening political power.
[Guest]: So when the optics died down,
[Guest]: the power is still there.
[Guest]: So which is why, which is why I think,
[Guest]: you know, nobody's going to,
[Guest]: people aren't framing the problem correctly.
[Guest]: Nobody's saying, hey, let's reform the judiciary.
[Guest]: If you ask me the reason why we have a criminals in politics problem
[Guest]: is because the judiciary is not able to decide cases quickly enough against them.
[Guest]: If you ask me why people are so outraged about 498A,
[Guest]: it's because we're not actually reforming the judiciary
[Guest]: so that, you know, obviously,
[Guest]: malafide cases are not being dismissed.
[Guest]: That you're not saying,
[Guest]: why are you arresting this person?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Under the code of criminal procedure,
[Guest]: arrest is not something that automatically happens
[Guest]: just because somebody files an FIR against you.
[Guest]: You're not enforcing it against them.
[Guest]: Even 66A for that matter of the Information Technology Act
[Guest]: was a case where you did not seriously see
[Guest]: you're putting this law in the hands of your local constable.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That person is not going to care what,
[Guest]: you know, the fine words of this law mean.
[Guest]: And he's not going to pull out a dictionary to see
[Amit Varma]: what malicious means or what any of that means.
[Amit Varma]: It's a blunt instrument he's going to use.
[Guest]: It's a blunt instrument.
[Guest]: And even for that blunt instrument,
[Guest]: the court should be able to rectify these things,
[Guest]: but they're not.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: You file something,
[Guest]: you hope quickly that you'll get a hearing,
[Guest]: that the prosecutor turns up on time
[Guest]: and that, you know,
[Guest]: they will not try and mess up something else.
[Guest]: People don't have that faith in the judiciary
[Guest]: that if,
[Guest]: even if we have a law,
[Guest]: which is somewhat egregious,
[Guest]: that there is somebody who can ensure that
[Guest]: things are remedied quickly enough.
[Guest]: So which is where the response is
[Guest]: do something about the law itself.
[Guest]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Which is completely the wrong response,
[Amit Varma]: which causes more issues.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try and sum up
[Amit Varma]: the two broad problems as I see them
[Amit Varma]: that you pointed out with the judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: So A,
[Amit Varma]: tell me if I'm articulating this properly
[Amit Varma]: and summing it up properly
[Amit Varma]: and B,
[Amit Varma]: tell me if you want to add to it.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: Problem number one is that
[Amit Varma]: we have a bloated system
[Amit Varma]: which doesn't deliver justice
[Amit Varma]: or delays it so inordinately
[Amit Varma]: that it might as well be called
[Amit Varma]: a denial of justice itself.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that
[Amit Varma]: is a 19th century mindset
[Amit Varma]: which focuses just on judges giving outcome
[Amit Varma]: and not the speediness of the process.
[Amit Varma]: And that needs to change.
[Amit Varma]: Problem number two is that
[Amit Varma]: we have a civil rights issue
[Amit Varma]: because certain civil rights
[Amit Varma]: and certain rights are not protected
[Amit Varma]: by the constitution
[Amit Varma]: as they should be
[Amit Varma]: and therefore
[Amit Varma]: they are left at the discretion
[Amit Varma]: of state governments
[Amit Varma]: to tamper with
[Amit Varma]: as and when they feel like
[Amit Varma]: which they often do
[Amit Varma]: for reasons of optics
[Amit Varma]: to show that
[Amit Varma]: hey we are doing something
[Unknown]: about this problem
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes
[Amit Varma]: they may not intend that
[Amit Varma]: but mistakes happen
[Amit Varma]: because they are not
[Amit Varma]: farsighted enough.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a correct summation?
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: that's the correct thing
[Guest]: and one feeds into the other.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: One feeds into the other.
[Guest]: You see that
[Guest]: the fact that our judiciary
[Guest]: is so inefficient
[Guest]: is so unable to deliver
[Guest]: his judgments on time
[Guest]: and ensure a trial
[Guest]: is completed
[Guest]: sort of means that
[Guest]: the thing is
[Guest]: okay we can only do this.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: We can only change the law
[Guest]: and if that means
[Guest]: you'll have to give up
[Guest]: your civil liberties.
[Guest]: That's the unfortunate situation
[Guest]: that we're finding ourselves in.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the sort of
[Amit Varma]: solutions which are
[Amit Varma]: a. typically touted
[Amit Varma]: and b. which you feel
[Amit Varma]: can work?
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: a lot of the times
[Guest]: the solution
[Guest]: that is touted
[Guest]: is we need more judges.
[Guest]: That's not true.
[Guest]: Yes,
[Guest]: of course,
[Guest]: because Karnataka and
[Guest]: Calcutta High Court
[Guest]: for instance are
[Guest]: recently suffering the
[Guest]: problem of even a
[Guest]: minimum number of judges
[Guest]: are not being available
[Guest]: just to be able to
[Guest]: handle the existing
[Guest]: case sort of cases.
[Guest]: But I think
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: capacity problem
[Guest]: in terms of the
[Guest]: number of judges
[Guest]: is somewhat overstated.
[Guest]: We don't need
[Guest]: that many more.
[Guest]: Maybe we need about
[Guest]: 10 or 15 percent
[Amit Varma]: increase in judges
[Amit Varma]: and we'll be fine.
[Amit Varma]: Which is easily doable.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: to be fair,
[Guest]: I'm going to break
[Guest]: that on a little bit
[Guest]: for you, which is
[Guest]: reasonably easily
[Guest]: doable.
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: capacity is not
[Guest]: so much of an issue.
[Guest]: Computerization is
[Guest]: touted as
[Guest]: a big
[Guest]: solution to problems.
[Guest]: But you're talking
[Guest]: about a country
[Guest]: where not all
[Guest]: trial courts have
[Guest]: access to
[Guest]: electricity.
[Guest]: So what
[Guest]: computerization
[Guest]: are you talking
[Guest]: about?
[Guest]: So NCAER did
[Guest]: this fascinating
[Guest]: study on how
[Guest]: the e-court
[Guest]: system has
[Guest]: worked in India.
[Guest]: They studied
[Guest]: about five
[Guest]: states.
[Guest]: If you have to file a case
[Guest]: in this place,
[Guest]: you have to carry
[Guest]: two cans of diesel
[Guest]: with you.
[Guest]: They said,
[Guest]: what?
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: So if you go to
[Guest]: the filing counter,
[Guest]: they'll say,
[Guest]: power cut,
[Guest]: system
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: diesel
[Guest]: go
[Guest]: in the
[Guest]: court
[Guest]: in the trial
[Guest]: court level,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: what computerization
[Guest]: are you going
[Guest]: to do when
[Guest]: you can't
[Guest]: guarantee basic
[Guest]: electricity?
[Guest]: The solution that is started is tribunals.
[Guest]: All right,
[Guest]: let's take it out of
[Guest]: courts and
[Guest]: let's appoint
[Guest]: in tribunals.
[Guest]: But tribunals
[Guest]: suffered the
[Guest]: same problems
[Guest]: as courts,
[Guest]: 10x.
[Guest]: You have a
[Guest]: very casual
[Guest]: attitude towards
[Guest]: hearing cases.
[Guest]: You have
[Guest]: people who
[Guest]: are not
[Guest]: qualified
[Guest]: being appointed
[Guest]: to tribunals.
[Guest]: You have
[Guest]: excessive
[Guest]: control of
[Guest]: so you have
[Guest]: both the
[Guest]: problems.
[Guest]: You have
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: monopoly
[Guest]: of
[Guest]: getting
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: courts.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: when you
[Guest]: are
[Guest]: in a
[Guest]: tribunal,
[Guest]: you
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: enormous
[Guest]: autonomy
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: decide
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: decision.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: when you
[Guest]: are
[Guest]: in a
[Guest]: tribunal,
[Guest]: you
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: all the
[Guest]: rights
[Guest]: For instance, if, and this is what other countries have done with great success, a person who
[Guest]: attended a day's hearing in a California state level court saw that there were about 70 matters
[Guest]: on the list, right?
[Guest]: Now, everybody complains about, Oh my God, there are 70 cases in Indian courts every
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: How can they hear it?
[Guest]: What happened was very simple.
[Guest]: Numbers one to 65.
[Guest]: All that happened was this party here, party here.
[Guest]: Are you guys ready to mediate?
[Guest]: Refer to mediation.
[Guest]: Party here, party here.
[Guest]: Ready to mediate?
[Guest]: Refer to mediation.
[Guest]: We had 65 cases done that way.
[Guest]: Remaining five cases, we tried mediating, not happening.
[Guest]: Fine.
[Guest]: I'll fix dates for trial.
[Guest]: We start here.
[Guest]: We end this date.
[Guest]: So again, layman's question.
[Guest]: What do you mean by mediation?
[Guest]: What happens?
[Guest]: So mediation is when you sit down with the mediator, person who knows how to bring parties
[Guest]: to this thing, you arrive at some sort of a consensus that this is how we'll settle
[Guest]: a dispute.
[Amit Varma]: And you need a consensus.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not a judgment.
[Guest]: It's not a judgment.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And the point is that mediators job is to just help you come to a consensus.
[Guest]: They will not say you guys should resolve it like this.
[Guest]: They will not say you guys should do this.
[Guest]: They'll say, okay, what is the issue?
[Guest]: Why are you here?
[Guest]: What do you really want from this case?
[Guest]: What are you willing to let go?
[Guest]: And they have it with both parties individually sitting with parties.
[Guest]: It's a, I would say labor intensive process because in court, it's easy to say list after
[Guest]: four weeks, file document, whatever.
[Guest]: This requires a certain level of empathy, understanding and patience.
[Guest]: They feel a lot of times it's happened, but a good mediator will be able to ensure that
[Guest]: parties find the common ground and say, you know what, okay, I'm willing to let go of
[Guest]: a little bit of this because I'm still getting this, or actually all I just wanted was this
[Amit Varma]: and that person is willing to give me this.
[Amit Varma]: Is it kind of data about like what percentage of cases go to mediation and what percentage
[Guest]: succeed?
[Guest]: So we tried to do that study.
[Guest]: We have actually done that study.
[Guest]: So we were able to get the data only from Delhi, Bangalore and Tamil Nadu.
[Amit Varma]: By we of course you mean Delhi which is a legal firm.
[Guest]: So we were commissioned by the department of justice to do this study on mediation.
[Guest]: That report is on our website.
[Guest]: The exact figures I don't have instantly, but a significantly large number now it can
[Guest]: be improved, right?
[Guest]: Uh, in the sense that if we had more mediators, if more people are aware and if more trained
[Guest]: mediators at the moment, mediators are still doing this as their second job, whereas when
[Guest]: other countries in the world, it's a full-fledged profession.
[Guest]: People usually are some sort of lawyer or some sort of a retired judge.
[Guest]: They're happy doing the other things and they mediate because they offer their services
[Guest]: for free for the, there's a Bangalore mediation center, there's a mediation center at the
[Guest]: Delhi high court.
[Guest]: They work as well as they do within their constraints, but it could be a hundred X better
[Guest]: if you ask me with sufficient funding and training and some interest put into it, it
[Guest]: will be a hundred X better.
[Guest]: Arbitration.
[Guest]: Um, in our arbitration is basically like a court setting, but outside the court you do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: It's a private court, you know, then in a way manner of speaking, unfortunately in our
[Guest]: country, uh, arbitration is dominated by retired judges.
[Guest]: So they bring that particular approach to them.
[Guest]: Uh, so they're also insistent on following certain rules and unfortunately our courts
[Guest]: are not very helpful when it comes to handling arbitration questions.
[Guest]: But if you have a good professional network of arbitrators, if you have good institutions
[Guest]: which facilitate arbitration, you can, all, most of the high value disputes which come
[Amit Varma]: to court will immediately get moved over there.
[Amit Varma]: And again, so what exactly is arbitration?
[Amit Varma]: So it's like if you and I have a dispute, we go to court and they tell us, Hey, why
[Amit Varma]: don't we go for arbitration and we go for arbitration.
[Guest]: Is the decision binding?
[Guest]: Yes, it is.
[Amit Varma]: It is binding.
[Amit Varma]: If we agree to go for arbitration, the decision is binding, but it's guaranteed to happen
[Guest]: within a certain amount of time.
[Guest]: So that is how the law should be, right?
[Guest]: And they've amended the law to try and make it, that would then be the incentive.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Now the advantage for me is I'm not dependent on 60 other cases being heard before my arbitration
[Guest]: is heard.
[Guest]: I am not dependent on the judge have not being on leave and so on.
[Guest]: We fix the dates at our convenience.
[Guest]: We figure out what's convenient for the arbitrator and us.
[Guest]: And a primary reason for a lot of arbitration is confidentiality.
[Guest]: You don't have to make the documents public if it is a say commercial issue.
[Guest]: So in that sense, that is what arbitration does.
[Guest]: It's essentially like a private court, but it is, it's orders will be enforced as if
[Guest]: it's the orders of a court.
[Guest]: You don't need to go to court again and say, make this the final decree.
[Guest]: And they'll say, yeah, done.
[Guest]: You have to follow it.
[Guest]: If there's any difficulty in following it, we'll smoothen the process.
[Guest]: So, but the problem is in India, most of the arbitrations are what are called ad hoc arbitrations,
[Guest]: which means you and I agree to arbitrate, there's a dispute, and then we go looking
[Guest]: for who will be the arbitrator.
[Guest]: Whereas the practice should be that we, you and I will agree that, Hey, there's this institution
[Guest]: which does arbitration.
[Guest]: They will select the arbitrator.
[Guest]: They have a certain set of rules.
[Guest]: They, they will guarantee that it will be done in one year, but we will go looking for
[Guest]: an arbitrator, somebody who, you know, both of us can figure out, we'll do this quickly
[Guest]: and we'll provide us with this thing, provided you and I are both on the same page that we
[Guest]: want this dispute to be resolved.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Supposing I want this delayed and you want this done quickly, then we can find ways to
[Amit Varma]: stay in court for a hundred years, a hundred years.
[Guest]: But I'm assuming the time that parties wanted, this arbitration is an option.
[Guest]: And there are other things like conciliation and there are negotiations.
[Guest]: These are all mechanisms which our laws provide for, but no effort has been put into making
[Guest]: them effective alternates to litigation.
[Amit Varma]: But these are also sort of, they strike me as solutions that treat the symptoms while
[Amit Varma]: the, you know, the root cause of the disease, like you described the 19th century mindset
[Amit Varma]: and the conventions and rules around the judiciary process.
[Guest]: These don't address those.
[Guest]: So they don't, but it has to be, if you see the judiciary as one element of a dispute
[Guest]: resolution process, right, you will realize, Oh, hang on, what's the big deal in having
[Guest]: people file suits for everything, right?
[Guest]: They can go sort this out through mediation, conciliation and arbitration.
[Guest]: And if it is something you absolutely cannot resolve, then we get to the next stage.
[Guest]: And then the next stage is what, say something like the commercial courts act in India tries
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I was part of the drafting process, the law commission of India, and there was an
[Guest]: existing draft, which was terrible.
[Guest]: And we figured, okay, that's, that's, there's no way that this can become the law.
[Guest]: And when we looked around the world, we studied how the philosophical approach to litigation
[Guest]: to a case has changed around the world.
[Guest]: And we found that more countries in the world put the judge at the center of the case.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now that you've decided, I need this to be decided by a judge, fine, you're going to
[Guest]: follow his orders.
[Guest]: You're going to follow his rules.
[Guest]: The judge will now say, okay, you have three months, complete all the documents, whatever
[Guest]: you want to file.
[Guest]: Uh, you have one week, finish everything that you need to in this one week.
[Guest]: All right.
[Amit Varma]: And you have at least five days for hearing evidence.
[Amit Varma]: And does it, do those judges have rule based guidelines which tell them that this is a
[Guest]: process within this much time?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So we have also in that particular law, we have also amended the code of civil procedure
[Guest]: to try and update a little bit to say that, okay, now the judge will have the powers to
[Guest]: say in four weeks to this, in eight weeks to this, in 12 weeks to this, and giving them
[Guest]: no discretion to extend the time.
[Guest]: Because what happened to the previous attempt at amending the CPC was everything became
[Guest]: discretionary.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, um, the, and so far the way this law has been interpreted, courts are consistently
[Guest]: saying this is a law made to cut down time fully taken for litigation.
[Amit Varma]: So we're not going to give anybody second chances.
[Guest]: So this applies to what commercial cases, commercial cases above a value of one crore.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So we're just high value commercial business.
[Guest]: They usually take a long time to dispose of because you'll find mountains and mountains
[Amit Varma]: of papers.
[Guest]: Parties can lengthen it as long as they want to.
[Guest]: So the idea of this law is to cut it short to say that, look, just tell us what are the
[Guest]: five points you're discussing, you're disputing, right?
[Amit Varma]: Tell us who will be the people who will come.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then mandatory?
[Amit Varma]: Like if we have a dispute, which is more than that amount, is it mandatory for us to go
[Amit Varma]: to?
[Guest]: So it depends.
[Guest]: Jurisdiction, jurisdiction.
[Guest]: So we have left it to the discretion of the state government because they'll know how
[Guest]: many such cases are there.
[Guest]: But they can make it mandatory.
[Amit Varma]: They can.
[Amit Varma]: So it is mandatory.
[Guest]: So all cases are normally transferred.
[Guest]: So it started with the Bombay High Court and the Delhi High Court, where usually a one
[Guest]: crore plus cases used to be filed.
[Guest]: So the high court set up a commercial court and a commercial, a commercial division and
[Guest]: a commercial appellate division.
[Guest]: So all the cases were transferred there.
[Guest]: Now we're seeing more and more state government setting up commercial courts.
[Guest]: Um, the, the, the decision is not that much as to do a little bit with India's judicial
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: I'll come to that in a little bit.
[Guest]: So for instance, Karnataka just set up a commercial court, Rajasthan has set up a commercial court,
[Guest]: uh, UP is in the process of setting up a commercial court and other and Chhattisgarh has set up
[Guest]: a commercial court.
[Guest]: So they're saying that, okay, this seems to work.
[Guest]: Investors are saying cases are moving quickly.
[Guest]: We're not getting stuck in this litigation and uh, maybe it may be a good idea for you
[Guest]: to also set it up.
[Guest]: So it's, uh, and they're also being assessed by the government on, are you setting up a
[Guest]: commercial court?
[Guest]: Which it's easy enough.
[Guest]: The only thing is how well they train the judges, get the right judges, how well they
[Guest]: coordinate the high court.
[Guest]: So we'll see over the few years, but this is the first attempt, I think, at really trying
[Guest]: to change the mindset of how our courts should be like.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And now your argument also, therefore would be that if we, you know, we are trying to
[Amit Varma]: change the rules of the game so that this mindset dominates and delivers justice faster
[Amit Varma]: and therefore fairer at these commercial courts.
[Guest]: Why should that not apply to all courts?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: It should.
[Guest]: But I think it'll take time.
[Guest]: The reason why I said it'll take time is that our profession, the legal profession, when
[Guest]: I say our profession, I mean the legal profession, um, in India is extremely skewed.
[Guest]: Um, you can't expect that somebody who has the capacity to move a case quickly, uh, at
[Guest]: say for a one crore kind of dispute will be able to do that for like a smaller dispute
[Guest]: where they're dealing with somebody who was barely paying them any fees.
[Guest]: Um, I sort of wrote about this, I think 7% of lawyers in any court, right?
[Guest]: And I checked this at the trial court level and the Supreme Court level, 7% of the lawyers
[Guest]: seem to have 50% of the cases.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: And I'm considering each case to have the same value, but it is not right.
[Guest]: I'm sure that if I broke it down by the kind of case, how much money was involved, what
[Guest]: fees are being paid, I'm pretty sure that 7% of the lawyers are making about 90% of
[Guest]: the money.
[Guest]: Right, right.
[Guest]: So that doesn't mean you ignore the remaining 93% they're handling a large number of cases,
[Guest]: but they may not have the capacity to move as quickly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And if you, you don't want to risk imposing a kind of burden on the litigant that they're
[Guest]: not able to match up to you.
[Guest]: So if you start this as a practice, if people see, ah, this is how it is done.
[Guest]: And you know, maybe sort of adopt those practices or maybe if you find that the legal profession
[Guest]: gets more organized and people are able to do this in a better way, then of course it
[Guest]: can be extended.
[Amit Varma]: But would you say that then this is a problem with the supply of lawyers in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you have those lawyers being supplied who can be part of the elite 7% who are making
[Guest]: all the money, but otherwise you have substandard lawyers, not to mean that word in a pejorative
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: That's absolutely right.
[Guest]: And that's absolutely right because we are seeing the effects of about four decades of
[Guest]: neglect of legal education.
[Amit Varma]: So can I then take a detour into that and into talking about legal education and where
[Amit Varma]: has it gone wrong and what could change that?
[Guest]: So initially the law colleges were all set up by government, the GLC in Bombay and GLC
[Guest]: here, university law college here, you find GLC everywhere.
[Guest]: Governments did put a bit into investing in law colleges and they did produce excellent
[Guest]: lawyers but post independence, um, not to sound like I'm the guy blaming Nehru, but
[Guest]: somehow the nation sort of got obsessed.
[Guest]: We need more engineers and doctors and lawyers will come on their own.
[Guest]: What is that?
[Guest]: Uh, so it meant that most of the legal education now was taken over the private sector.
[Guest]: It was a kind of de facto privatization if I want to call it where law colleges could
[Guest]: be open.
[Guest]: So now you now have the bar council of India which says, okay, fine, this law college meets
[Guest]: our requirements.
[Guest]: So you're allowed to open and function.
[Amit Varma]: And uh, the bar council would control the supply, like they would, they would be doing
[Guest]: licensing and stuff like that.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, yes.
[Guest]: They would.
[Unknown]: I mean the control is exercised very loosely in a manner of speaking, there was literally
[Unknown]: no control.
[Guest]: There was like, fine, if you want to set up your setup, as long as you pay us the fat
[Guest]: price.
[Guest]: That is basically what it became after a while.
[Guest]: Sometime in the eighties they realized, oh no, you know, like this time to sort of see
[Guest]: it, take legal education seriously and which is when we had the national law school set
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: They weren't sure will this work, not work.
[Guest]: But when it's been about a decade in and realize, oh wow, you know, we're like actually succeeding
[Guest]: at this.
[Guest]: We set up more national law schools.
[Guest]: Now I think the number is about at about 20 and they're mushrooming.
[Guest]: A lot of private universities have also sort of seen this as a standard we have to aim
[Guest]: to, but we don't have to meet them.
[Guest]: But the fact is that lawyers are in the system.
[Guest]: The fact is, uh, the law, a law degree was possibly one of the cheapest degrees you could
[Guest]: get, you know, as a professional degrees, right?
[Guest]: Medicine is expensive.
[Guest]: Engineering was expensive.
[Guest]: Dentistry, whatever.
[Guest]: Everything was expensive.
[Guest]: But as a professional degree, the law was the cheapest to get.
[Guest]: Um, anybody and everybody could do a law degree and it's great in terms of ensuring the number
[Guest]: of degrees are there.
[Guest]: But when they actually entered the profession, they realized we're not going to be able to
[Amit Varma]: make a living.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it's a struggle for the remaining 93%.
[Guest]: Uh, I think what you're seeing in terms of lawyer strikes, what you're seeing in terms
[Guest]: of a goondism by lawyers is a reflection of this.
[Guest]: It's a reflection of the fact that I have invested six years of my life trying to become
[Guest]: a lawyer.
[Guest]: I have, but now I realize that it's useless.
[Guest]: Nothing else I can do now.
[Guest]: And uh, you try to make a living in some way or the other and you find a bad faith ways
[Amit Varma]: of doing so.
[Amit Varma]: It's a supply demand mismatch there.
[Guest]: Why is that happening?
[Guest]: Why is that happening is because, so the mismatch happens usually when the, there is no price
[Guest]: information trickling through.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Actually, Adam Smith describes this very well and I can do no better than quote him.
[Guest]: Um, even he points us out when he talks about the legal profession in the 18th century England,
[Guest]: he says that his favorite number seems to be 20.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not as if he chooses the exact right, he uses 20 all over the place.
[Guest]: So he says of 20 people, only one lawyer can succeed and he'll make as much as the remaining
[Amit Varma]: 19.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: He says that because in the nature of the legal profession as it stands, all 19 believe
[Amit Varma]: they can be that one person.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's a survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: You see the guys who succeed.
[Guest]: You see the guys who succeeded to think I can become that person, but you don't actually
[Guest]: know what happens to the remaining 90.
[Guest]: So they kind of disappear.
[Guest]: Um, there is that.
[Guest]: The second thing also is that the law is a profession where just getting a degree doesn't
[Guest]: help you.
[Guest]: It means you've fulfilled the most basic threshold to be allowed to wear that black coat and
[Guest]: go into court.
[Guest]: But to be a successful lawyer, you need about 10 years worth into the profession.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Um, and he's talking about a situation where you say you don't have the advantage of somebody
[Guest]: handing over the practice.
[Amit Varma]: You're your father.
[Amit Varma]: You'll apprentice somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: You'll clock somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: You'll learn the ropes.
[Guest]: You try desperately to get clients and hope you survive long enough.
[Guest]: So once you survive, once you cross the 10 year threshold, your peers have all fallen
[Guest]: off the radar.
[Guest]: So now you make as much money as 20 of them.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: That's what happens.
[Amit Varma]: Is this like this across the world?
[Guest]: Like how is it in the U S in the U S it's a much more organized profession.
[Guest]: You see in India, 90, I would say about 95 to 99% of lawyers are in solo practitioners
[Guest]: or maybe no more than two or three.
[Guest]: Whereas around the world, as economies economies develop, the scale of legal services needed
[Guest]: requires law firms.
[Guest]: In India, law firms are still becoming bigger and bigger in size.
[Guest]: Our biggest law firm just split in half.
[Guest]: So we can't even just say that, uh, you know, uh, that we are getting there.
[Guest]: Uh, and law firms in India keeps splitting into smaller and smaller sizes.
[Guest]: Uh, but ideally the services require you, you to have a full fledged law firm.
[Guest]: Uh, we have not gotten there yet.
[Guest]: Profession needs to be more organized.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think this is something we'll evolve towards in India or something needs to be
[Guest]: done to, uh, provide
[Guest]: We'll evolve towards that.
[Guest]: But I think to be done, we need to sort of ensure that people understand this is what
[Guest]: getting into the legal profession means that, uh, you're probably going to fail and that
[Guest]: there's no other way to put it.
[Guest]: Uh, you've got a law degree, uh, congratulations, but you're probably going to fail in the profession.
[Amit Varma]: This is kind of like Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: Like I live in Warsaw in Mumbai and I go to the cafes and there are strugglers all around.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, everyone is a survivorship bias again, everyone is thinking of the, uh,
[Amit Varma]: Manoj Bajpai or the Nawazuddin Siddiqui or the strugglers who make it.
[Amit Varma]: They don't see that most strugglers don't make it.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm really surprised to hear from you that the law is like that because I would
[Amit Varma]: have thought, you know, as a profession, it would be more like medicine and engineering.
[Guest]: No, it's not because even medicine, medicine, there are hospitals, right?
[Guest]: There are hospitals and there's only a small layer of, uh, everybody works within institutions.
[Guest]: In the law, unfortunately we don't because the law firm being the default is not there
[Guest]: for us.
[Guest]: The default is still as a solo practitioner.
[Guest]: You set up this thing.
[Guest]: Even our courts, you know, like the way they allocate chambers to lawyers, right?
[Guest]: They're still obsessed with the small solo practitioner.
[Guest]: They're not thinking about law firms, the big institution, and even then their filings
[Amit Varma]: are relatively...
[Guest]: It's a jolly LLB.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I think that between the two movies, they pretty much cover most of the pathologies
[Guest]: of the legal system.
[Guest]: And yes, there's an element of exaggeration, but I think they've nailed it.
[Amit Varma]: They're actually superb films.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they're good entertainment, but they're also, you know, they nail a lot of the things.
[Guest]: They nail a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move back from legal education to the law itself and a lot of the solutions
[Amit Varma]: that you kind of discussed take the pressure away by providing alternative ways of arriving
[Amit Varma]: at judgments, whether it's mediation or arbitration or the commercial courts that you pointed
[Unknown]: out.
[Amit Varma]: But do you then think that it's simply a matter of finding all these fixes or is there some
[Amit Varma]: fundamental change required and how hard or easy is that fundamental change to actually
[Guest]: bring about what is required for it?
[Guest]: So I don't see a fund because all these things put together will create that fundamental
[Amit Varma]: change.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: But that 19th century mindset.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it requires it.
[Guest]: I think the fundamental change is for the top section of the legal profession and judges
[Guest]: to accept that the system is broken.
[Guest]: Do they?
[Guest]: They don't.
[Guest]: That's the, that's the pity.
[Guest]: I mean, yes, we saw the press conference.
[Guest]: That means that's the first inclination that guys, I don't think things are working out
[Guest]: as they should.
[Guest]: But there's a sense of complacency at the top rungs of the profession that things are
[Guest]: fine.
[Guest]: There are problems.
[Guest]: We'll sort it out.
[Guest]: What they don't know is that from the court's data itself, the number of cases being filed
[Guest]: in court is falling.
[Guest]: Ignore criminal cases for the moment, because obviously they're a function of the population.
[Guest]: Civil cases experience around the world shows as a country's population increases, as the
[Guest]: economy grows, right?
[Guest]: As it goes from becoming a low income to middle income and so on, the number of civil cases
[Guest]: increase, more transactions, more disputes, more laws, more regulation, and so on, increases
[Guest]: across all levels of the judiciary.
[Guest]: Between I think the middle of the first decade of the 21st century and today, number of cases
[Guest]: filing started plateauing, right?
[Guest]: This was first noticed by three American scholars, C.T.L.
[Guest]: Carl Anthony, Nick Robinson, and Theodore Eisenberg, they wrote about it.
[Guest]: Nobody noticed it in this country.
[Guest]: I mean, they're still working on the issue, by the way, but, and I've, I've been trying
[Guest]: to spread the word.
[Guest]: So I decided to follow that up and see, okay, they looked at data in the early part of the
[Guest]: 21st century.
[Guest]: I thought, let me look at the latest data.
[Guest]: And I wrote about this for APW, the article is still up.
[Guest]: Cases filed across courts are, civil cases are falling.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a sign of the people's loss of trust in the judiciary.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: That's a sign of people voting with their feet.
[Guest]: They are saying, um, you know, there's no point going to court.
[Guest]: They're saying that unless I'm put in a situation where I have absolutely no other choice, I
[Guest]: will not go to court.
[Guest]: This tells you the system is broken completely.
[Guest]: Yes, it is.
[Guest]: And the problem is there is a total complacence in the higher levels of the judiciary and
[Guest]: the legal profession that this is what it is.
[Guest]: Um, you know, the other day, uh, Professor Madhav Menon, who was, uh, one of the persons
[Guest]: behind the founding of the national law school, still a legal loom in every way, he's like,
[Guest]: why do you want to bring in all these numbers and stuff inside in the judiciary?
[Guest]: How does this help you?
[Guest]: This is dangerous.
[Guest]: What does it tell you?
[Guest]: But look, look at what the numbers are telling us.
[Guest]: That's shocking because data tells stories.
[Guest]: These are the stories.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And these are the stories.
[Guest]: This should be the most pressing story.
[Guest]: It's not as if I dug up these numbers from some arcane corner of the country.
[Guest]: It's that the Supreme court has put out these numbers.
[Guest]: They are there for the public to see.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, the court itself is not that interested in looking at these numbers.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, nobody else is really talking about it, but guys, this is what is happening.
[Guest]: Uh, people are actively voting with their feet and one more to the courts.
[Guest]: Now you can say possibly a lot of the cases are going to tribunals, but not that many
[Guest]: tribunals are there to take away that many cases.
[Guest]: You can say alternate dispute resolution, but that's available only to a very tiny section.
[Guest]: Uh, a few years ago, Justice D Y Chandra was currently in the Supreme court when he was
[Guest]: a judge of the Bombay court.
[Guest]: He was speaking to us in a lecture and he said, you know, in, in court, I told, uh,
[Guest]: parties, if there's something you can resolve by mediation, I'll refer you to mediation.
[Guest]: So parties agreed, nodded, lawyers looked at each other, nodded.
[Guest]: Then at the end of the day, the lawyer for another party came to his chamber and said,
[Guest]: yes, what is it?
[Guest]: He said, sir, I have one small question for you.
[Guest]: He said, yes.
[Guest]: What is mediation?
[Guest]: So you may think it's so obvious it's there.
[Guest]: Why would you use it?
[Guest]: Even in the legal profession, people don't know.
[Guest]: This was in Bombay.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about some small rural, uh, court.
[Guest]: This was in Bombay, in the Bombay high court.
[Guest]: A lawyer comes up and says, what's mediation again?
[Amit Varma]: So this is, this is what you point out as a problem of awareness at two levels that
[Amit Varma]: one, the people who actually run the judiciary aren't aware of these deep problems.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps in some cases, they're ignoring the data and don't take it seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And deeper down, even the regular legal profession, they're not as aware of it either.
[Amit Varma]: So my question to you is that is what is needed to get us out of that 19th century mindset.
[Amit Varma]: Is it a cultural change or is it a change of the rules of the game?
[Guest]: So one attempt is being made with the rules of the game, uh, with commercial courts, right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The idea, which if you see the law commission report, which prompted this commercial court
[Guest]: law is to say that if we change the rules and people start getting used to following
[Guest]: these rules, it'll bring about a cultural change, right?
[Guest]: That is one attempt at it.
[Guest]: But I think there's a second larger attempt, which needs, which say maybe this won't be
[Guest]: able to do.
[Guest]: They will be able to do it in the context of say civil suits and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But there's a larger cultural change needed in terms of who becomes judges, who becomes
[Guest]: senior advocates and so on.
[Guest]: It's still a very small pool of people.
[Guest]: It's a very small, self-selecting pool of people is I think the most dangerous thing
[Guest]: for an institution.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Any institution, the rules are fixed.
[Guest]: The way it works is fixed and people keep coming and going.
[Guest]: You know, the institution is going to die if it's the same people with the same thought
[Guest]: and the same approach and have no understanding of what's happening in the outside world.
[Guest]: That's unfortunately what's happening to our judiciary and the high levels of the bar.
[Guest]: My one longterm project, which I hope will cause me to get contempt of court notice is
[Guest]: to create a family tree of all the judges of the Supreme Court of India to see how many
[Guest]: people are related to other judges.
[Guest]: And I'm sure I will find a shockingly high number.
[Guest]: I can expand that to say how many of their families, how many of their fathers, uncles,
[Guest]: brothers, or even in some cases, mothers, aunts, and so on were senior advocates in
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: I'll get an even shockingly higher number.
[Guest]: Some of this research is there, uh, there's an, there was a great American academic George
[Guest]: H. Gadbois.
[Guest]: His book is fantastic.
[Guest]: It's called the judges of the Supreme Court of India.
[Guest]: He gives a brief biography of each and every judge of the Supreme Court between 50 to 89.
[Guest]: And the depressing outcome is that it's exactly the same kind of person who has been coming
[Guest]: to the Indian judiciary since the 1950.
[Guest]: And what will change this?
[Guest]: What will change this is changing that.
[Guest]: So two ways to change this.
[Guest]: One is that the profession widens, right?
[Guest]: Uh, the profession widens so that paths to success are more.
[Guest]: It's not that you survive for 10 years and therefore you succeed, which means depending
[Amit Varma]: on your parents.
[Amit Varma]: Can any law graduate in the country today hope to become chief justice of the Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court someday, or is it only a privileged few because of the background and so who have
[Amit Varma]: that clear path?
[Guest]: Chief justice of India, surprisingly has been fairly diverse, right?
[Guest]: We have had a justice Kapadia who started as a law clerk, I mean a clerk of a lawyer,
[Guest]: not even a law clerk, a clerk of a lawyer to become a chief justice of India.
[Guest]: We've had a justice Satasivam who was the first in his village to complete an education
[Guest]: who has gone on to become the chief justice of India.
[Guest]: Um, we have had people who have overcome difficulties to become the chief justice of India, but
[Guest]: there it's a selection, right?
[Guest]: At that point you're like, I want this person, somebody somewhere has decided, I want this
[Guest]: person to become a chief justice, but we're talking about the larger system.
[Guest]: I'm talking about the fact that currently there are about 700 judges at the high court
[Guest]: and Supreme Court level and many more below them.
[Guest]: The problem is there is a glass ceiling.
[Guest]: The glass ceiling is that actually the lowest level is the most diverse in the lowest level.
[Guest]: States have implemented reservations.
[Guest]: More women are present in the judiciary.
[Guest]: You have a wider representation of sections of society.
[Guest]: But because the next level you, it depends on the discretion of about five, usually men,
[Guest]: five to six men, they choose people like that.
[Guest]: So their prejudices perpetuate themselves through generations and you have those guys
[Guest]: rising through the system.
[Guest]: So one way to undo this is to what the government tried and botched very badly in 2014 is to
[Guest]: change the appointment mechanism.
[Guest]: What they tried to do was to say, was to take the tangent of the issue on a completely different
[Guest]: pattern.
[Guest]: It should be the government or the judiciary.
[Guest]: Actually, that's not the problem.
[Guest]: The problem is who are the people who are being appointed, right?
[Guest]: It honestly to me doesn't matter anymore if it is three judges or five judges and three
[Guest]: government or three judges and five government.
[Guest]: It does not.
[Guest]: You need to be able to say, we want a judiciary which will cater to a wider section of people,
[Guest]: which will ensure that, you know, people are, have a shot at being judges of the high court
[Guest]: and even the Supreme Court, irrespective of whether they were the sons or daughters of
[Guest]: famous lawyers.
[Guest]: And if they have worked their way through the system, a high court position should be
[Guest]: a reward for them or not a reward, it should not be a reward, should be a right to them,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So it should become, I think, a rule that the 10 best performing judges every year become
[Guest]: high court judges, right?
[Guest]: At the lower level, you will instantly solve capacity problems that I mean, people will
[Guest]: keep raising issues.
[Guest]: They're not good enough, or they could be much better.
[Guest]: I mean, this is going to be there, but if you're not going to make any effort at improving
[Guest]: the quality of the subordinate judiciary, you're going to be stuck with the small elite
[Guest]: of people becoming judges again and again, their children becoming judges, their friends
[Guest]: becoming judges, their chamber mates becoming judges.
[Guest]: And you'll be stuck with this elite, which, which loses touch with what's happening.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, one of the best books I've read in recent years, Super Forecasting by Philip
[Amit Varma]: Tetlock has a chapter about how diversity leads to better decision making, which study
[Amit Varma]: after study has shown that even diversity for its own sake will lead to better decision
[Amit Varma]: making more than any other factor.
[Amit Varma]: And when you talk about the judiciary, where decision making is essentially everything,
[Amit Varma]: exactly, it's, it's mind boggling that we actually have a system that works the other
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And, uh, you need this kind of diversity in terms of representing India's diversity.
[Guest]: I mean, they maintain diversity in the way that you will have 25% from South, 25% from
[Guest]: West, East and North.
[Amit Varma]: That's the only diversity that's maintained.
[Amit Varma]: It sounds like cricket back in the day.
[Guest]: This is actually empirically shown by George Gatbois in his book between the 40 years,
[Guest]: the appointment mechanism has ensured that there is a roughly equal representation from
[Guest]: the four broad regions of India.
[Guest]: But you want diversity in terms of caste, you want diversity in terms of class, you
[Guest]: want diversity in terms of gender, you want diversity in terms of people with different
[Guest]: life experiences.
[Guest]: People are first generation lawyers.
[Guest]: People are first generation graduates.
[Guest]: And unfortunately we're not even thinking on those lines in the system.
[Guest]: It's still becoming a very self-serving, selecting elite.
[Guest]: And that sort of shows in the way in which they're not thinking about the institution
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Uh, you, we are now in a system where each year justice is like, I have one year for
[Guest]: retirement.
[Guest]: Let me just pass this out.
[Guest]: The third major controversy, no, there's no trust within the system to let's change these
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's become like, Oh, I have settled into this.
[Guest]: I have one more year of retirement.
[Amit Varma]: I will quietly pass this through and let's hope nothing happens to actually bring about
[Amit Varma]: change is a cultural one where the people who are running the system want to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore they change the rules of the game.
[Amit Varma]: And our problem sort of is that because you don't have enough diversity of thought or
[Amit Varma]: diversity of representation, you have the same little narrow clique out there who are
[Amit Varma]: just content to, you know, let their time go by.
[Amit Varma]: So now tell me something very often in other fields, like I've done so many episodes on
[Amit Varma]: different aspects of public policy and the question always comes back to, okay, so what
[Amit Varma]: can the government do to change this?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you get the government to change this?
[Amit Varma]: But it's a, it's a given that the judiciaries should fundamentally be autonomous.
[Amit Varma]: Is this an area where the government even has a role?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I think the government has a role, but unfortunately the government has approached this in a bad
[Guest]: faith way.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So the unfortunate history of government judiciary relations in independent India has been a
[Guest]: mutual bad faith relationship where the judiciary suspects and has put these barriers in place
[Guest]: to prevent government intervention and government intervenes to say, now we want to be able
[Guest]: to control you guys.
[Unknown]: So it's been an antagonistic, antagonistic thing.
[Guest]: And in fact, the relationship is supposed to be antagonistic, but not in this way, not
[Guest]: in a bad faith way.
[Guest]: You're supposed to be able to say what you're doing is not right.
[Guest]: And it's supposed to be able to say, we are also a check on you, but not in the sense
[Guest]: of, I want to control you or I'm going to treat everything you do with suspicion.
[Guest]: That is not the kind of antagonism that we want.
[Guest]: It's difficult.
[Guest]: It is going to be difficult for the government to test it and tell the judiciary what needs
[Guest]: to be done.
[Guest]: It has to be the best that the government can do is to sort of play a facilitative role.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And one of the ways is to say that, guys, please accept this reality.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: We want things to change and we'll help you make the change.
[Guest]: It's not as if that's not impossible.
[Guest]: But they can't mandate the change.
[Guest]: They can't mandate the change.
[Guest]: They can't.
[Guest]: That's the thing that you can't mandate the change.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Which is the good thing.
[Guest]: What the, and I would think that the NJSC case or the NJSC saga would have happened
[Guest]: very differently if the government and good faith had said, we want to hold consultations
[Guest]: with the judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: Give me your TLDR.
[Guest]: What saga?
[Guest]: What case?
[Guest]: I'm talking about the judicial appointments commission where the Supreme Court struck
[Guest]: down the constitutional amendment to say that we're adding a law minister to the appointment
[Amit Varma]: process and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: If the government had said, and I'm not saying this, this government did it badly, that essentially
[Amit Varma]: the same government.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It was, the idea itself was very flawed.
[Guest]: When you said, okay, we'll come up with this bill.
[Guest]: We'll pass it in parliament.
[Guest]: We'll amend the constitution and everything will be fine.
[Guest]: If you had said, taken a draft of the judiciary and said, guys, we think this needs to change.
[Guest]: And it's not because we want to control you.
[Guest]: We think that there is some issue with the way in which appointments is happening and
[Guest]: we were considering how best to address it.
[Guest]: We have an idea.
[Guest]: What do you think can be done?
[Guest]: I think you would have had a very different reaction because the experience of lawmaking
[Guest]: in India shows that the more you involve stakeholders, the more robust that law will be.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And the judiciary here is the stakeholder in a law when it comes to appointments.
[Guest]: When you sort of shut them out of the process and said, huh, we'll pass a bill.
[Guest]: You better follow it in the future.
[Guest]: You're going to get a reaction to it as well.
[Guest]: So, which is why I think that is what the government's role should be.
[Guest]: The government's role really should be, look, it's easy to write checks, right?
[Guest]: The judiciary pretty much gets what it's, get it, get what gets what it wants.
[Guest]: And half the time it's not able to spend it because they're not trained in how to run
[Guest]: an institution.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: We, judges end up becoming judges because they're successful lawyers.
[Guest]: At most they may have managed a office of 10 people or 15 people, not a sprawling institution
[Guest]: of the size of even say the Karnataka high court or any, any average high court, I think
[Guest]: has hundreds of employees.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not talking about the really tiny ones.
[Guest]: So they haven't even evolved mechanisms of how to do this kind of internal management.
[Guest]: They don't.
[Guest]: And they don't have the training or the understanding of how to manage this body.
[Guest]: They learn on the job.
[Guest]: Some of them do a good job.
[Guest]: Some of them don't do a good job.
[Guest]: But I think there needs to be that awareness of the judges as well as say, okay, look,
[Guest]: you know, our role has changed.
[Guest]: We're not just the guys who come to court at nine o'clock in the morning and leave at
[Guest]: six in the morning, having spent the bulk of our day deciding cases.
[Guest]: We are running this institution and we're in charge of running this institution.
[Guest]: So we need to put in place mechanisms that make it easier for us to run this institution.
[Guest]: We can't just rely on our administrative staff, figuring out how to do things when we give
[Guest]: these grand pronouncements and then they're hoping things work out.
[Guest]: So there needs to be that level of acknowledgement as well.
[Guest]: And the government sort of saying, we're here to help you, right?
[Guest]: You figure out, you know, what would work for you best and we're here.
[Guest]: So the government can at best play a facilitative role.
[Guest]: But I still think the pressure for the change will come bottom up.
[Guest]: The pressure to change will come bottom up when, you know, lawyers start realizing that
[Guest]: nobody's coming to us anymore, right?
[Guest]: Our profession is increasingly becoming irrelevant and that we are, yes, we have these few highly
[Guest]: important cases are a few highly important stuff, but at the end of the day, our profession
[Guest]: no longer enjoys the kind of respect or the kind of dignity that other professions are
[Guest]: handed that people are conscious that even the smart, talented young people leaving law
[Guest]: colleges are saying, thank you.
[Guest]: I'd rather go to a law firm and work for a corporate or work for an NGO or work in policy
[Guest]: than come to the court and decide to be this thing.
[Guest]: So when they see that, you know, hang on, our profession is literally dying at the roots,
[Guest]: that is when I think there will be some pressure to, you know, push the thing forward.
[Amit Varma]: So this has been a very illuminating conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Let me end by asking you two questions.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, that one, what makes you hopeful about the judiciary in India and things changing
[Amit Varma]: for the better and so on?
[Amit Varma]: And two, what makes you despair?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, let's, let's talk of the despair.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Um, what, what, what makes me despair is to sort of see the state of the higher judicial
[Guest]: institutions, the state of the high courts in the country and the Supreme court.
[Guest]: Uh, the fact, I mean, whatever the news yesterday, three judge bench says other three judge bench
[Guest]: was wrong and saying every judgment is wrong.
[Guest]: I was going like, Oh my God, do you guys just realize how idiotic you sound?
[Guest]: It's a part of a bigger issue.
[Guest]: I mean, we can go into the niceties of who was right and who was wrong, but you, you
[Guest]: see that there is a complete and total breakdown of trust within the institution that as an
[Guest]: institution you have stopped functioning.
[Guest]: You're just a bunch of judges sitting there and doing things.
[Guest]: What gives me hope is actually the lowest level.
[Guest]: What gives me hope is that on a daily basis, yes, you may say that they're slow, they're
[Guest]: inefficient, they're terrible, but your civil rights and my civil rights are being defended
[Guest]: by the guys at the lowest level, by the magistrates, by the civil judge, junior division, senior
[Guest]: civil judge, senior decision.
[Guest]: They're the ones who do the painstaking task of conducting a trial.
[Guest]: They're the ones who ensure that everybody gets a fair hearing.
[Guest]: They're the ones working in the worst possible conditions, but still, you know, inspiring
[Guest]: sufficient confidence that, okay, you can at least trust them to this extent.
[Guest]: They're still doing the thing in terrible condition and in horrible condition, but they
[Guest]: still turn up.
[Guest]: They do their job.
[Guest]: You still have judges like judge Ajmeet Singh, who in the face of enormous pressure in the
[Guest]: Ram Rahim case decided correctly.
[Guest]: You have a judge like the Sousa, the Karnataka high court judge in the face of such enormous
[Guest]: pressure over Jai Jalilitta, fantastic judgment, just did his job right.
[Guest]: You just need, and there are people who are just doing their jobs and that's really what
[Guest]: we need more of.
[Guest]: So that gives me hope.
[Guest]: But it also gives me hope is the fact that at least with the law schools in the picture
[Guest]: and the fact that even the private law colleges are pushing to improve the standards and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Guest]: The supply of good lawyers, the supply of good lawyers is going up.
[Guest]: That more and more people are choosing law because they see a future for themselves in
[Guest]: the profession that they see that, yes, you know, there's something good that can come
[Guest]: out of this.
[Guest]: Uh, we are seeing that people are seeing that the law is not just a 19th century institution,
[Guest]: which we are stuck with somehow, but we need to bring it into the 21st century.
[Guest]: So we're having more informed conversations about the law I see.
[Guest]: And people may say this is negative, but I see this as a necessary positive.
[Guest]: The courts are being covered like never before, right?
[Guest]: I would like our newspaper to do 10 X, but I think we're doing 10 X of what we were doing
[Guest]: two decades ago.
[Guest]: Um, today people are live tweeting from the courts.
[Guest]: People are following what order was passed.
[Guest]: People are following cases, you know, with great interest, understanding issues, knowing
[Guest]: this is how courts work and they want more.
[Guest]: And I think at the end of the day, the court's credibility as an institution rests on only
[Guest]: one thing.
[Guest]: Forget everything else.
[Guest]: It rests on the fact that it's the only institution that today you can go and see how it functions.
[Guest]: You can't walk into a bureaucrat's office, you can't examine their files unless you follow
[Guest]: a very detailed procedure.
[Guest]: You're not allowed to enter into parliament.
[Guest]: And you know, unless until we got television, nobody knew what was exactly happening in
[Amit Varma]: parliament.
[Amit Varma]: So to some extent, improving the judiciary, the onus is on us as citizens, because this
[Guest]: is the one institution which is actually transparent, transparent.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, uh, and there are of course issues of how to make sense of judgments and yes, our
[Guest]: courts are covered and all of that, but you can see it working.
[Guest]: The public can go and see it work and the litigant can go and see it working.
[Guest]: And I think the more scrutiny there is, and you don't, you don't just leave it to the
[Guest]: lawyers and litigants to scrutinize the courts, you leave it to the general public to scrutinize
[Guest]: the courts.
[Guest]: The more people scrutinize the courts, the more people say, Hey, this is not working
[Guest]: or something is seriously going wrong.
[Guest]: I think that's what gives me hope.
[Guest]: That's what gives me hope that there'll be enough pressure put on the fact that on the
[Guest]: judges on the lawyers and everybody else that something needs to be done.
[Amit Varma]: That's a hopeful and inspiring note to end on.
[Amit Varma]: We don't just have to lament the state of the judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: We can be part of the change.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I've learned a lot from you today and it's, it's an honor.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do follow Alok on Twitter at alokbi, that's
[Amit Varma]: A L O K B I. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A. And you can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot I N. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, it makes complete sense for you to
[Amit Varma]: check out the Pragati podcast, a show on public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Pragati is a magazine I edit and the Pragati podcast is hosted by two of my colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: Every week, Pawan and Hamsini analyze views and news from India and the world and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts and practitioners on a wide range of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday.
[Amit Varma]: So there's your midweek fix right there.
[Unknown]: There she stands, a podcast addict, outside the bank, having traveled several miles to
[Unknown]: get in with other poor souls like her.
[Unknown]: The journey, though daunting for this youngling, will have some comfort because she has downloaded
[Unknown]: her favorite podcast.
[Unknown]: You can see more of her species on IVMPodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!